Data science is a well-known field these days, and it is one of the most demanded too. The term “data science” has many definitions. Some say it is the science of data or that it is the process of extracting useful information from unstructured (not organised) data by applying various methodologies, processes, and techniques that already exist and have been used earlier. Data science does not have a perfect definition. Actually, it is not a field of study but a technique in itself, which can be used in every part of our lives. What we see around us is all data. For example, phone numbers, weather reports, daily transactions, banking details, even when we watch TV, it is nothing but a set of data available for entertainment purposes. So, at its most fundamental level, data science can be defined as the methods or processes used to extract useful insights from any type of data and then use this information to build efficient systems and modern-day technologies.

If someone wants to learn data science, he/she should first learn three basic fields, i.e., statistics, mathematics, and computational thinking. All three of these are vast domains of study, and it is not possible to master them all since knowledge of any subject is not limited. So, to be precise, one should have fundamental knowledge of these subjects. Then, after having built strong fundamentals, one should start learning programming languages for data science. That includes Python, as it has a very big library and the syntax is very simple for beginners. Then comes Scala, which is one of the most popular functional languages as it runs on the Java virtual machine (JVM). It is an ideal option if someone has to work with high-volume data sets. Since it has JVM origins, it can be easily used with Java in data science.

Data science and related fields have a lot to talk about, but for an introduction to it and to get a basic idea of it, I think this post will be useful. I would also suggest you all start exploring data science, machine learning, artificial intelligence, deep learning, ANN, etc. as these are the future of the tech world.
