Well , most of you would be knowing about Machine Learning or just having a basic idea of it or maybe you would be wondering what the hell is this thing and why everyone is so crazy about this . Well Machine Learning in short ML is the future of tech and business worlds from predicting the spread of the COVID-19 to supporting cutting-edge cancer research, Artificial intelligence & ML can disrupt and transform every single segment of society. Naturally, it is hard to imagine a future without machine learning in our lives today. It is not possible to produce an optimal solution for various industries without using machine learning and AI. An optimal solution is one which has reached its maximum or best value — for example: the least cost and the most profit .

One thought everyone have in their mind is that “ What if these technologies like AI & ML start overpowering humans ? ” . A simple answer is that the future is not about people vs AI it is people who know AI vs people who don’t . It is very clear that these technologies will surely bring something unthinkable in the future which will help upcoming generations to explore and build new technologies that seems impossible today .
Coming back to Machine Learning , as the name suggest here we are going to make our machine learn something . what i have understand is that we all are going through the process of ML from our childhood . . So when you were a child you were going through the learning process and your brain was getting trained by the set of images and sounds provided to you. For example if we wanted our “model” to look at a set of images and remember the patterns so that next time an image is shown the model will “guess” what is on the image .

Here the “model” is like a child’s brain and in technical terms we can call it as machine learning algorithms . So if you show an apple to a child and say to him “this is an apple” , repeating this for 20 times a connection is established in brain and next time you show an apple voila!!!! the child guesses it right .

Now Learning can be classified into 3 types . (1) Supervised learning (2) Unsupervised Learning and (3) reinforcement Learning . When i say supervised learning it clearly means there is a “supervisor” present in whole learning process . So let’s focus on supervised learning only in this section and soon i will be writing on the other two types .
Supervised Learning has a supervisor present as a teacher . Basically we are training our machine with some data that is well labelled. Now by labelled data i mean the thing we are going to predict is already present with us , label can be any variable , usually represented by ‘y’ . Every label has some features associated with it . These features describe that variable for example you have five shirts of different colors , here shirt is a label and feature are various colors like black , white , red , blue and green . So , to describe a label we have features . Another good example is considering a fruit basket containing bananas , apples , mangos and some guavas , if i tell my machine that if an object is round and of red colour then it will be labelled as apple and if it is round and of yellow color it will be labelled as a mango , the process i am doing here is called training my machine with some input data . So the next time a round and red colour object is shown to the machine it will classify it as an ‘apple’ and same with other fruits as it has been trained with some already known values . Supervised learning can be divided into two categories (a) Classification and (b) Regression .

I wont get into depth of what is classification and regression for now just remember when the result of an ML algorithm is a category like “good” or “bad” , “black” or “white” etc … we take that into classification problem and when the outcome is real value i.e “dollar” , “height” , “tensile strength” we consider it as regression problem . I hope you like reading it please do suggest improvements in the comment section and for the next blog i will continue supervised machine learning and we will master it together .

